IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 55, NO. 4, AUGUST 2008

2425

Optical and Scintillation Properties of Inorganic
Scintillators in High Energy Physics
Rihua Mao, Member, IEEE, Liyuan Zhang, Member, IEEE, and Ren-Yuan Zhu, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a comparative study of optical
and scintillation properties for various inorganic crystal scintillators, which are used, or actively pursued, by the high energy
physics community for experiments. Transmittance, excitation and
photo-luminescence spectra were measured for samples with a dimension of 1.5 radiation length. The transmittance data are compared to the theoretical limit calculated by using refractive index,
assuming no internal absorption. Refractive index of lutetium oxyorthosilicate and lutetium-yttrium oxyorthosilicate was measured
by using a V-prism. Light output was measured for these samples
with Tyvek paper wrapping, and the result is presented with the
quantum efficiency of the readout devices taken out. Temperature
coefficient of the light output was also measured. The result of these
measurements will be used in the summary table of the inorganic
scintillator section for the 2008 edition of the particle data book.
Index Terms—Crystal, emission, light output, refractive index,
scintillator, temperature dependence, transmittance.

I. INTRODUCTION

T

HIS is a part of the on-going work to improve the inorganic scintillator section in the particle data book [1].
The summary table in the inorganic scintillator section of the
2006 edition includes a comparison of the light output measured
by using a photomultiplier tube (PMT) with a bi-alkali cathode
for various crystals with unspecified size and wrapping. Since
crystal sample’s light output is a product of its light yield, the
light collection efficiency of the readout device and the quantum
efficiency (QE) of the readout device samples of different size
and wrapping material would have different light output.
To eliminate this ambiguity samples of various crystal scintillators were procured with a well defined dimension. Crystal
density, or its radiation length, affects directly the detector size
in high energy physics experiments since the detector depth is
usually defined to fully contain electromagnetic showers of the
highest energy. All samples thus are defined with a dimension of
and the area of two end faces equaling
1.5 radiation length
. There is no particular reason to choose 1.5,
to
however, except that it is large enough and it is easy to maintain
a full coverage with a 2” PMT.
During the light output measurement samples are wrapped
with Tyvek paper, which is a standard wrapping material with
Manuscript received January 11, 2008; revised April 24, 2008. Current version published September 19, 2008. This work was supported in part by the
U.S. Department of Energy under Grant DE-FG03-92-ER-40701 and the U.S.
National Science Foundation Awards PHY-0612805 and PHY-0516857.
The authors are with the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA
91125 USA (e-mail: zhu@hep.caltech.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online
at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TNS.2008.2000776

Fig. 1. A photo showing samples investigated in this work.

good reproducibility as compared to other wrapping materials,
such as Teflon films. To further facilitate a direct comparison
with different readout devices, such as silicon photodiode (PD)
and avalanche photodiode (APD) which are widely used in high
energy physics experiments, the QE of the PMT used to measure
the light output is also taken out.
In addition to the light output, optical transmittance, UV excitation and photo-luminescence spectra were also measured. A
comparison of the transmittance data with its theoretical limit
shows sample’s optical quality. Refractive index as a function
of wavelength was also measured for LSO and LYSO samples
where no published data are available. Finally, the temperature
dependence of the light output was also measured. The result of
these measurements will be used as an input for the summary
table of the inorganic scintillator section in the 2008 edition of
the particle data book.
II. SAMPLES
Fig. 1 shows all samples investigated. They are pure cesium
iodide (CsI), sodium doped cesium iodide (CsI:Na), thallium
doped cesium iodide (CsI:Tl), thallium doped sodium iodide
(NaI:Tl) in the top row and yttrium doped lead tungstate
or PWO), cerium doped lutetium oxyorthosili(
, LSO) and cerium doped lutetium yttrium
cate (
oxyorthosilicate (
, LYSO), bismuth geror BGO), cerium fluoride
and
manate (
in the bottom row. All these crystals
barium fluoride
have either been used in, or actively pursued for, high energy
and nuclear physics experiments. It is worth to point out that recently discovered cerium doped lanthanum tri-halides, such as
and
, are very bright and fast, but are not included
in this study. We plan to include these samples in our further
study when they are more or less in a mass-production stage.

0018-9499/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on November 7, 2008 at 01:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 55, NO. 4, AUGUST 2008

Fig. 2. Excitation (red), photo-luminescence (blue) and optical transmittance (green) are shown as a function of wavelength for heavy crystal scintillators commonly used in high energy physics experiments. The solid black dots represent the theoretical limit of the transmittance.

Samples are arranged in an order of their density, or radiation
length. Crystal scintillators in the top row are hygroscopic.
The CsI and NaI based samples were procured from Institute for Scintillation Materials, Khar’kov. Because of the
hygroscopicity these samples are sealed in 3 mm thick quartz
, BGO,
and
windows to prevent surface damage.
samples are provided by Shanghai Institute of Ceramics,
Shanghai. LSO and LYSO samples are procured from CTI
Molecular Imaging and Saint-Gobain Ceramics & Plastics,
Inc. respectively. According to the manufacturers, the yttrium
content is about 10% for the Saint-Gobain LYSO. The nominal
cerium doping level is 0.2% for the CTI LSO and is less than
1% for the Saint-Gobain LYSO. All these samples are of
mass-production quality, which may be different from samples
in early development stage before the optimization is finalized.
All samples, except the NaI:Tl sample, have a cubic shape with
. The NaI:Tl sample is a cylinder of 1.5
a dimension of 1.5
long with the area of two end faces equal to
to match the 2 inch PMT.
III. TRANSMISSION, EXCITATION AND PHOTO-LUMINESCENCE
Fig. 2 shows a comparison of the transmittance (green lines,
right scale), photo-luminescence (blue lines) and excitation (red
lines) spectra as a function of wavelength for eight samples. The
UV excitation and photo-luminescence spectra were measured
by using a Hitachi F4500 fluorescence spectrophotometer, as
shown in Fig. 3. The angle between the excitation beam and
the sample normal was set to be 10 so that the photo-luminescence spectra collected are not affected by internal absorption
in the sample. As a comparison, this figure also shows a sample
(dashed), where measured photo-luminesposition with
cence spectra would be affected by internal absorption. Internal
absorption does affect the shape of the emission spectra, causing

Fig. 3. The setup used for excitation and photo-luminescence measurement,
where  = 10 (solid) and 0 (dashed) lead to the measured photoluminescence
spectra without and with internal absorption.

a red shift of the luminescence peak wavelength. This effect is
crystals since a part of
more visible for LSO, LYSO and
their emission is self-absorbed [2]. Two emission peaks are obsample. They are a fast component peaked
served for the
at 220 nm and a slow component peaked at 300 nm.
Optical transmittance was measured by using a Perkin Elmer
Lambda-950 spectrometer equipped with double beam, double
monochromator and a general purpose optical bench with light
path up to 40 cm. The systematic uncertainty in repeated measurements is about 0.15%. The solid black dots in Fig. 2 rep, which
resent the theoretical limit of the transmittance,
is calculated according to [3] by using the refractive index data
[5], NaI [6],
[7], [8],
[9] and
of BGO [4],

Authorized licensed use limited to: CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on November 7, 2008 at 01:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAO et al.: OPTICAL AND SCINTILLATION PROPERTIES

2427

TABLE I
REFRACTIVE INDEX OF LSO AND LYSO CRYSTALS

Fig. 4. The setup used to measure refractive index with a V-prism.

CsI [10], assuming multiple bouncing between two parallel end
surfaces and no internal absorption

(1)

Fig. 5. Scintillation light pulse readout by a PMT and recorded by an Agilent
6052A digital scope is shown for five fast crystals with the decay time from an
exponential fit (dashed lines).

where

(2)
We note that PWO crystals are birefringent. The difference of
the refractive index measured along different axis is at a level of
10% as discussed in [7], [8]. Its consequence to the theoretical
limit of transmittance calculated along different optical axis is
discussed in details in [11].
Since there is no existing refractive index data as a function
of wavelength in literature for LSO and LYSO, their refractive index between 405 and 546 nm was measured by using a
V-prism, as shown in Fig. 4 [12]. The sample crystal was coupled to the V-prism with optical oil, which has a similar refractive index of the V-prism. The refractive angle between the incident light and the refractive light is a function of the refractive
indices of the sample and the V-prism. By measuring the refractive angle as a function of wavelength, sample’s refractive
can be determined as a function of the overall refracindex
and the refractive index of the V-prism
:
tive angle

(3)

Table I shows the numerical result of the refractive index of LSO
and LYSO. The result at 420 nm agrees well with that in the original patent [13]. In the wavelength region of this measurement
no difference was found between the refractive indices obtained
from LSO and LYSO samples.
A comparison of the measured optical transmittance and its
reveals sample’s overall optical quality. As
theoretical limit
shown in Fig. 2, the measured transmittance approaches the
theoretical limits for all samples, indicating very good optical
quality of these samples. It is also interesting to note that while
and CsI(Tl) crystals have their emission spectra
the BGO,
well within the transparent region, the UV absorption edge in
, NaI(Tl) and
the transmittance spectra of the LSO, LYSO,
samples, however, cuts into the emission spectra and
thus affects crystal’s light output. This effect is more seriously
observed in long LSO and LYSO samples as discussed in details
in [14] and [15].
With recent interest of the high energy physics community in
measuring both the scintillation and Cherenkov light, we also
note that the values of the cut-off wavelength, at which the transmittance data show 50% of that at 800 nm, are 140 nm, 280 nm,
293 nm, 315 nm, 318 nm, 342 nm, 358 nm, 365 nm and 390 nm
, CsI,
, BGO, CsI(Na), PWO, CsI(Tl), NaI(Tl)
for
and LSO/LYSO respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on November 7, 2008 at 01:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 55, NO. 4, AUGUST 2008

Fig. 6. Scintillation light pulse readout by a PMT and recorded by an Agilent
6052A digital scope is shown for five slow crystals with the decay time from an
exponential fit (dashed lines).

Fig. 8. Light output measured by using a Photonis XP2254b PMT is shown as
a function of integration time for five fast crystal scintillators.

-ray peak position was determined by a simple Gaussian fit,
and was used to determine sample’s light output in a unit of
photoelectrons per MeV energy deposition by using calibration
of the single photoelectron peak.
The light output as a function of the integration time was fit
to the following function to determine the fast and slow components and the decay kinetics:

(4)

Fig. 7. The setup used for the light output measurement.

IV. LIGHT OUTPUT AND DECAY KINETICS
Figs. 5 and 6 show a statistical average of 1,024 scintillation pulse shape readout by a PMT with fast response time and
recorded by an Agilent 6052A digital scope for five fast and
slow crystal scintillators respectively, which are excited by a
source. The numerical values of their decay time listed in
these figures were extracted by an exponential fit (dashed lines)
to the pulse shape. The scintillation light output and decay kinetics were also measured at the room temperature (20 ) by
using a Photonis XP2254b PMT, which has a multi-alkali photo
cathode and a quartz window. The setup used in this measurement is shown in Fig. 7. In this measurement one end of the
sample was coupled to the PMT with Dow Corning 200 fluid,
while all other faces of the sample were wrapped with Tyvek
source was used to excite the sample.
paper. A collimated
The integration time used was ranged from 45 to 4,000 ns. The

where is the fast component of the scintillation light with a
decay time of less than 10 ns, and represents the slow component with a decay time of longer than 10 ns.
The light output shown in Figs. 8 and 9 are in unit of photoelectron/MeV which depends on the QE of the readout device used. In high energy physics applications readout devices
of very different QE may be used, such as Si PD and APD. It
thus is useful to take the QE of the Photonis XP2254b PMT out.
The light output in unit of photon/MeV is calculated as

(5)
is the emission weighted quantum efficiency calThe
culated according to

(6)
where
and
tion of wavelength.

are the QE and emission as a func-

Authorized licensed use limited to: CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on November 7, 2008 at 01:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAO et al.: OPTICAL AND SCINTILLATION PROPERTIES

Fig. 9. Light output measured by using a Photonis XP2254b PMT is shown as
a function of integration time for five slow crystal scintillators.

2429

Fig. 11. The quantum efficiencies of a Hamamatsu S2744 photodiode (solid
dots) and a Hamamatsu S8864-55 APD (open circles) are shown as a function
of wavelength together with the emission spectra of the LSO/LYSO, BGO and
CsI(Tl) samples, where the area under the emission curves is proportional to
their corresponding light output.

Fig. 12. The setup used for the temperature coefficient measurement.
Fig. 10. The quantum efficiencies of a Hamamatsu 1306 PMT with a bi-alkali
cathode (open circles) and a Photonis 2254B PMT with a multi-alkali cathode
(solid dots) are shown as a function of wavelength together with the emission
spectra of the LSO/LYSO, BGO and CsI(Tl) samples, where the area under the
emission curves is proportional to their corresponding light output.

Figs. 10 and 11 show typical QE data measured for various
readout devices, such as the Photonis 2254B PMT with a multialkali cathode, which was used in our light output measurement (solid dots), and a Hamamatsu R1306 PMT with a bi-alkali cathode (open circles) in Fig. 10 and a Hamamatsu S2744

photodiode (solid dots) and a Hamamatsu S8864-55 APD (open
circles) in Fig. 11. Also shown in these figures are the emission spectra of LSO/LYSO, BGO and CsI(Tl) crystals with the
area under each emission spectrum proportional to the corresponding light output. The numerical result with QE taken out
is summarized in Table II for mass-produced inorganic crystal
scintillators, which have been used, or actively pursued, by the
high energy and nuclear physics community for experiments.
and
As discussed that all samples have a dimension of
with Tyvek paper wrapping.

Authorized licensed use limited to: CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on November 7, 2008 at 01:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NUCLEAR SCIENCE, VOL. 55, NO. 4, AUGUST 2008

TABLE II
PROPERTIES OF HEAVY CRYSTAL SCINTILLATORS USED OR PURSUED BY THE HIGH ENERGY PHYSICS COMMUNITY

TABLE III
TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT OF LIGHT Yield

V. LIGHT OUTPUT TEMPERATURE COEFFICIENT
It is known that light yield of crystal scintillators may vary
as a function of temperature. This variation has a consequence
, of
in detector design. The temperature coefficient,
the light yield was measured for ten samples. Fig. 12 shows the
setup used for this measurement. The temperature of the sample
is controlled by a PC through a NESLAB RTE-111 cooler,
which circulates water with defined temperature to a copper
heat sink fixed on the sample to be measured. About 30 minutes
were needed for the temperature to reach an equilibrium. Light
yield was first measured as a function of temperature between
and 35 . The numerical result of the temperature coef5
ficients at 20 was determined by a linear fit, as listed in the
top row in Table III.
has two scintillation components
As shown in Fig. 2,
with very different temperature coefficients. Two band pass filters, BPF-214 and BPF-300, were used to select fast and slow
. Fig. 13 shows the transmitscintillation component for
.
tance of these filters and the scintillation emission of
While the filter BPF-214 selects only the fast component peaked
at 220 nm, the filter BPF-300 selects only the slow component
peaked at 300 nm. Fig. 14 shows light output variations measured between 15 and 25 , and corresponding temperature

Fig. 13. The transmittance spectra of filters BPF-214 and PBF-300 and the
BaF emission spectrum are shown as a function of wavelength.

Authorized licensed use limited to: CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on November 7, 2008 at 01:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAO et al.: OPTICAL AND SCINTILLATION PROPERTIES

2431

Fig. 14. Light output temperature coefficient obtained from linear fits between 15 and 25 C for commonly used crystal scintillators.

coefficients obtained by linear fits for ten samples. The numerical result of these fits is listed in the bottom row in Table III and
also in Table II. As shown in Table III these two measurements
are consistent.
VI. SUMMARY
A comparative study on inorganic crystal scintillators was
carried out. Refractive index as a function of wavelength were
measured for LSO and LYSO by using a V-prism. Relative light
output was determined for crystal samples with a dimension of
and Tyvek paper wrapping, and with quantum efficiencies of the readout devices taken out. Light output temperature
coefficients at the room temperature (20 ) were also determined. Result presented here will be used in the inorganic scintillator section of the 2008 particle data book.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics for providing samples in this test, and Dr. G. Zhao of the
Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics for allowing
the publishing of the refractive index data he measured for the
LSO and LYSO samples.
REFERENCES
[1] Particle Data Group, Section 28.3, “Inorganic scintillators,” J. Phys. G:
Nucl. Part. Phys. 33, pp. 275–277, 2006.

[2] R. H. Mao, L. Y. Zhang, and R. Y. Zhu, “Emission spectra of LSO
and LYSO crystals excited by UV light, x-ray and -ray,” IEEE Trans.
Nucl. Sci., vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 1759–1766, Jun. 2008.
[3] D. A. Ma and R. Y. Zhu, “Light attenuation length of barium fluoride crystals,” Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A, vol. A333, pp.
422–424, 1993.
[4] P. A. William et al., “Optical, thermo-optic, electro-optic, and photoelastic properties of bismuth germanate,” Appl. Opt., vol. 35, no. 19, pp.
3562–3562, 1996.
[5] I. H. Malitson, “Refractive properties of barium fluoride,” J. Opt. Soc.
Amer., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 628–628, 1964.
[6] H. H. Li, “Refractive index of alkali halides and its wavelength and
temperature derivatives,” J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, vol. 5, no. 2, pp.
329–329, 1976.
[7] G. F. Bakhshieva and A. M. Morozov, “Refractive-indexes of molybdate and tungstate single-crystals having scheelites structure,” Sov. J.
Opt. Technol., vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 542–542, 1977.
[8] S. Baccaro et al., “Ordinary and extraordinary complex refractive index
of the lead tungstate (PbWO ) crystal,” Nucl. Instr. Methods Phys.
Res. A, vol. A385, pp. 209–209, 1997.
[9] P. Chindaudom and K. Vedam, “Characterization of inhomogeneous
transparent thin films on transparent substrates by spectroscopic ellipsometry: Refractive indices n() of some fluoride coating materials,”
Appl. Opt., vol. 33, no. 13, pp. 2664–2664, 1994.
[10] W. S. Rodney, “Optical properties of cesium iodide,” J. Opt. Soc.
Amer., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 987–987, 1955.
[11] R. H. Mao, L. Y. Zhang, and R.-Y. Zhu, “Quality of mass-produced
lead tungstate crystals,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 51, pp. 1777–1783,
2004.
[12] G. Zhao, private communication.
[13] C. Melcher, “Lutetium orthosilicate single crystal scintillation detector,” U.S. Patent 5 025 151, 1991.
[14] J. M. Chen, L. Y. Zhang, and R.-Y. Zhu, “Large size LYSO crystals for
future high energy physics experiments,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol.
52, no. 6, pp. 3133–3140, Dec. 2005.
[15] J. M. Chen, R. H. Mao, L. Y. Zhang, and R. Y. Zhu, “Large size LSO
and LYSO crystal for future high energy physics experiments,” IEEE
Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 718–724, Jun. 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: CALIFORNIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY. Downloaded on November 7, 2008 at 01:51 from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

